# Example how to connect to a Renku session via SSH (via a tunnel)

The project uses [iroh-ssh](https://github.com/rustonbsd/iroh-ssh) to establish a direct peer to peer tunnel between the Renku session and your machine. You can then login via SSH or connect VSCode directly to the session.

## Quickstart
- Be familiar with how SSH works and have it installed ([More Info](https://docs.github.com/en/authentication/connecting-to-github-with-ssh/generating-a-new-ssh-key-and-adding-it-to-the-ssh-agent))
- Install [iroh-ssh](https://github.com/rustonbsd/iroh-ssh#installation) for your platform


### Add authorized keys to secrets

#### Get your public key
Get your local public SSH key, e.g. on Linux run
```
cat ~/.ssh/id_ed25519.pub 
# Copy the output from the terminal
```

#### Prepare Renku secrets
In your Renku project go to `Settings`, then `Session secret slots` and add the following secrets

| Slot name | Filename | Content |
| --- | --- | --- |
| authorized_keys | authorized_keys | Your local public key |



### Setup Renku session
In your Renku project
- create a new session
- Choose **External environment**
- Add the following URL to **Container Image** field
```
ghcr.io/niowniow/codev-renku-ssh-image:main
```
- Click **Next**
- Choose a session name and click **Add session launcher**


### Start Renku session and connect via SSH
- Click the **Launch** button of your new session
- When the session is ready, click on the **Get Logs** button
- In the **Amalthea Session** tab you will find an entry like this
```
Connect to this this machine:

  iroh-ssh renku@0a2ccf05a10db63f35f21e7b5aacc6aec45995d06a0b4d40a59a3b5ff02e763c
```
- Copy the iroh-ssh line and paste it into a terminal of your local machine
- You should now be connected via SSH to your session


## Make persistent connection

The SSH connection changes on every restart of your session. You need to get the above connection id everytime you start the session. In order to always use the same id, we must fetch a persistent key pair from the Renku session and place it in the Renku secrets.

### Get iroh-ssh keypair
Use a terminal of the Renku session. Either in VSCodium via browser or using the established SSH connection.
Display the output of the following two files

```
cat ~/.ssh/irohssh_ed25519
cat ~/.ssh/irohssh_ed25519.pub
```

Keep the terminal or browser tab open. Open a new tab for the next step.

### Prepare Renku secrets
In your Renku project go to `Settings`, then `Session secret slots` and add the following secrets using the output from the previous step

| Slot name | Filename | Content |
| --- | --- | --- | 
| irohssh_ed25519.pub | irohssh_ed25519.pub | The public key generated by iroh-ssh |
| irohssh_ed25519 | irohssh_ed25519 | The private key private generated by iroh-ssh |

## SSH config
You can add an entry to your SSH config to connect directly using SSH

```
Host renku
    HostName <your-connection-id>
    User renku
    IdentityFile ~/.ssh/id_ed25519
    ProxyCommand iroh-ssh proxy %h
```

You can then connect to the session using
```
ssh renku
```

or connect a local VScode instance to it via the SSH Extension. Please make sure to not use the `small` Renku resource, as VScode-server might overwhelm the Renku session.


## Next steps
Build your own images using this example